
# data analytics tools:

- Analytical Tools to obtain valuable insights.


## Databricks

- most important analytics tools in Azure.
- advanced analytics and machine learning platform **based on Apache Spark** which is a parallel processing engine for large scale analytics
- Spark is designed to handle massive amounts of data by distributing the work across a cluster of computers, which considerably reduces the time needed to complete the analysis.
- Databricks uses a collaborative workspace that allows data engineers, data scientists and business analysts to work together. 
- It uses the concept of notebooks, which is a web based mix of runnable code, visualizations and text.
- The code runs in a series of steps called cells. Cells can support several languages such as Python, R, Scala, Java, and SQL. 
- Databricks supports the stream processing and can connect to several other Azure tools including data link storage, SQL databases, data warehouses, and Cosmos DB.
- Azure Data Factory also has Databricks activities. So you can call Databricks from an ADF pipeline.

## HDInsight
- managed analytic service **based on Apache Hadoop**, a collection of open source tools that can process large amounts of data through a set of clusters.
- HDInsight supports several analytics frameworks such as Hadoop, MapReduce, Apache Spark, Apache Hive, Apache Kafka, Storm, R, and more
- It stores the data using Azure Data Lake Storage and it's easily integrated with all their Azure tools and services.


## Data Modeling:

- **Azure Analysis Services:**
  - This enables you to build tabular models to support your OLAP queries. 
  - So the focus here is on analytics not transactional workloads.
  - The tool combines a graphical designer that helps you define the queries by combining, filtering, and, aggregating the data.
  - You can also use a Microsoft BI language called DAX for the query building
  - **best suited for smaller databases in less computational heavy workloads**
  - easier development experience and it's more easily integrated to Power BI

- **Azure Synapse Analytics**
  - advanced analytics and machine engine based on Spark and notebooks, similar to Databricks.
  - supports a wide variety of languages such as PolyBase, C-sharp, Python, Scala, and Spark SQL and also several file formats such as CSV, JSON, XML, Parquet, ORC, and AVRO
  - Azure snaps links for Azure Cosmos DB, which allows for hybrid transactional analytics processing or HTAB. HTAB tab is a mix of OLTP and OLAP. 
  - In Azure Synapse Studio, which is a web interface used to manage Synapse Analytics as well as create, edit, and debug both SQL and Spark codes
  - main advantages of using Azure Synapse Analytics is it's massive **scalability**.
  - **better for high volumes of data, several terabytes to a few petabytes to perform very complex calculations, and to implement complex ELT operations because MPP Engine of Spark and SQL Clusters allow for a higher scalability.**


- You can use Azure Synapse Analytics for the heavy lifting of dealing with large amounts of data and calculations and Azure Analysis Services to better serve your business users.