
# Azure Storage Services

- Azure storage account can contain, Azure blob storage, Azure files, Azure tables and Azure queues.

## Azure Table Storage
- Microsoft's implementation of key value stores
- doesn't have the concepts of schema, relationships, start procedures, secondary indices or foreign keys that are present on the relationship database
- can only search based on the key but not on the values
- data insertion and retrieval as expected with key value stores is quite fast regardless of the database size.
- like in cosmos DB, it divides the data into partitions. You can add the partition key on your queries for even faster results, which makes the choice of the partition key an important design decision.
- Azure tables is quite robust, being able to store hundreds of terabytes of data and is ideal when you need extremely fast data ingestion, such as IOT and telematics scenarios.
- like cosmos DB, it supports multiple read replicas.
- unlike cosmos DB, it does not support multiple write regions.
- 
## Azure Blob Storage

- Microsoft's main solution for unstructured data or blobs.
- available under an Azure storage account.
- supports massive amounts of data along with metadata,
- example: Azure blob storage  for example, if you're storing x-ray and MRI images of patients, you could store that along with metadata such as name, age, and patient ID
- supports encryption including the possibility of bring your own encryption keys, which is called BYOK.
- **hot tier** uses high-performance media and is therefore more expensive. So it's ideal for more frequently accessed data.
- the **cool tier** is more in the middle ground. It's cheaper, but not as fast as the hot tier.
- the **archive tier**, which is the cheapest but it might take a few hours to retrieve
- **re-hydration**: You could use this tier for files that you're unlikely to need again but you still need to keep that for compliance reasons such as a three-year-old backup
- Some uses of Azure blob storage are, serving images and documents for a website, is streaming audio and video, is storing backed up or archived data, and storing data for analytics


## Azure files
- Azure files enables you to create file shares on the cloud accessible through the internet.
- supports SMB 3.0, which is the protocol used by Windows but it's also currently in preview for NFS which is used by Linux.
- supports encryption including BYOK and Azure ID
- two main performance tiers standard, which uses HDD disks, and premium, which uses solid state drives or SSD
- The main use for Azure files is the migration of file shares from on premises Windows servers. You can use a command line utility called AzCopy to perform the copy to the cloud.