
# Relational Database Offering in Azure

## SQL server hosted on Azure

- Same as SQL Premises but hosted on Azure 
- IAAS level
- No hardware or cabling 
- you still manage patching, upgrade, backup, licenses etc. 
- this is required in case of lift and shift scenarios where we still have compatibility difference with azure SQL database. 

## Azure SQL database: 

- PASS level service where backup, patching etc. are all done by Azure,i.e,management of database is done by Azure
- 99.9% SLA
- no upfront costs
- **Available in Business Tier**: 
  - high speed and availability and low latency
  - read only copy for reporting

- **Disadvantage**: 
  - cannot install custom software as it would compromise security of azure environment
  - you can shutdown azure SQL VM but you cannot shutdown azure SQL database


- MicroSoft has created Data Migration Systems which scans your database and tells you the best migration option for you based on any compatibility issues

## Azure SQL is actually available in three different options.

### Single Database 
- low cost and minimal administration
- preferred for new projects

- limitations:
  - Azure SQL Single Database can only see one database at a time, which means that you cannot create cross database queries.

### Elastic Pool
- very similar to Single Database, except that it allows multiple databases to share the same pool of resources, such as processor and memory.

### Azure SQL Managed Instance

- close to 100% compatibility to SQL server on-premises
- It came in as a response to some limitations of Azure SQL Single Databases that were preventing companies from migrating to the cloud, such as linked servers, database mail, and cross database queries and transactions.
- On SQL MI, you're managing on a server, not database level, but you still enjoy the same PaaS level benefits, such as automated backups, patching, and advanced security


## Other Azure Database Offering for open source databases:

### Azure database for MySQL
- PaaS implementation of MySql Community Edition

### MariaDB
- newer Database Management System created by the original developers of MySQL
- engine has been rewritten and optimized for better performance
- And it also has some interesting new features, such as support for versioning, which allows you to create your tables as they were at different points in time. 
- also built on top of the Community Edition

### Azure database for PostgreSQL
- hybrid relational object database system
- PostgreSQL is extensible, and has good support for geometric data such as lines, circles, and polygons.
- It has two deployment options: single server for smaller workloads, and hyper scale which uses multiple nodes for faster query performance.



