
# Relational Data Management Task:

- here we will discuss on tools to manage databases operations such as creating, deploying, configuring, searching, permissions, and security, and so on




## database security

- all Azure databases are protected by server-level firewalls 
- it prevents access to database resources from other networks
- All access to your databases is blocked by the firewall by default. So remember that you need to configure the firewall rules before your client applications will be able to connect to them
- You might also need to enable outgoing traffic on your company's firewall
- Azure PostgreSQL uses port **5432**, and Azure MySQL and MariaDB both use port **3306**
- 
### database encryption:

- Azure databases also support encryption, which guarantees that the data doesn't appear as plain text
- Encryption occurs both in-transit with SSL connections enabled automatically, and at rest by encryption the database itself.
- **the technology that is used to encrypt an Azure SQL database is a proprietary Microsoft one called Transparent Data encryption, or TD**

### database threat protection:
- We also have Advanced Threat Protection, which detects unusual activities in accesses to your databases, alerting you of suspicious events. 
- ATP's available for Azure SQL, Azure MI, Synapse Analytics, and it's currently preview for MariaDB, MySQL, and PostgreSQL.

### database authentication and permissions:
- Authentication defines how we validate your identity on the database. 
- For authentication, **all four databases support both native SQL authentication and Azure AD**, with the exception of Azure MariaDB, which does not yet have Azure AD integration.

- **Azure AD integration is the preferred option** as it has several advantages over SQL authentication, such as centralized management of identities across several Microsoft and Azure resources, so that you don't need one account for each server.
- In Multi-Factor Authentication or MFA, which allows for more than one form of identification, considerably increasing security.



- Once you're authenticated, you need to make sure that you have the proper permissions to access the database resources.
  - **2 permission levels available:**
    1. 
       - **one** is permission on database resource itself which allows you to configure CPU, memory etc.
       - **this includes Azure Role based access controls or RBAC** with a set of **built-in groups and well-defined permissions**
       - You just need to put your administrators on the proper roles and all the relevant permissions are automatically assigned.
    2. 
       - **second** **refers to the data in objects inside the database**
       - For example, to be able to access a table on an Azure SQL database, you need to have at least a select permission on that table. Azure SQL has several built-in database roles available to simplify this management, such as DB Owner, which has full access, DB DDL Admin, which can execute DDL commands, and DB Data Reader, which can read all the tables.